---
title: Comments are welcome
published: 2013-02-23 16:00:00
tags: Meta
---

A comment section is an expected feature of a modern web site and it is hard to
find a page which does not contain a form to post a comment. Contrary to the
norm this website lacks such a form and will likely never have one. Read on for
some of my reasoning behind this decision.

# This website is statically generated

A statically generated website comes with a fair number of significant benefits.
Such a site is easy to host, to make performant and security is no longer as
major a concern. Alas, adding inherently dynamic elements (e.g. a comments
section) to such a website is not as straightforward as it would be otherwise.

One of the few options could be to use a JavaScript based comment widget which
interacts directly with a 3rd party service of some sort. Personally I never had
a pleasant experience interacting with such widgets in the past. Handing over
the ownership of the comment data to a third party is also quite an iffy
proposition…

I don’t really want to develop a solution like this on my own, either.

# Spam prevention is too hard

Dealing with an inevitable flood of spam requres a constant investment of time
to review and moderate the comments received through such a built-in form.

Services like [Akismet][akismet] may reduce the workload here. My previous blog
employed a combination of Akismet and [reCaptcha][recaptcha].  If Akismet deemed
comment to be a spam, the commenter would be presented a captcha to solve. All
things considered, this solution worked pretty well but it wasn't foolproof
either.

[akismet]: https://akismet.com/
[recaptcha]: http://www.google.com/recaptcha

# Blogs aren't suited for discussion

Recently I have seen the following [thought on discourse quality][citation-source]:

> There is a reason why blog posts and comments don’t create the discourse we
> are used from forums: In forums the initial post is just a spark and all
> subsequent posts are presented as equals. After a while there is little
> that sets the initial post apart from following posts.
>
> It’s very different with blog posts. The blog post itself almost always
> dominates the whole discussion, comments are visually set apart and often
> set in smaller font sizes. Following up on previous comments is awkward, so
> most comments are focused on the initial blog post, which means the
> discussion doesn’t go anywhere.

Indeed, I haven't seen a single blog with a comments section full of healthy
discourse. Given the rare updates on this blog, it would be quite foolish on my
part to expect a high quality discourse here.

[citation-source]: http://abdulkadir.net/2013/02/25/why-blogs-arent-suited-for-discussion/

# Comments are welcome by e-mail

After evaluating all the alternatives, I will not implement any commenting
functionality on this website. As an alternative, please send me an e-mail with
your thoughts and insight. I am hoping such an approach will work much better at
generating dialog than a comment widget would.
