---
title: Dysfunctional systems and small miscalculations
published: 2013-04-05 18:00:00+0200
description: A review of a visual novel game called dysfunctional systems.
tags: Natural Sciences, Otaku Jinsei
copy: CC BY 3.0
---

A few days ago I got to play a recently released [Dischan][dischan] visual
novel called [Dysfunctional Systems][dyssys]. The experience playing it was as
good as I expect from any game I devote time to, however I found it a bit
lacking in research. If you're in for numbers and physics rather than gaming,
you may [skip to the second part][cont].

[dischan]: https://dischan.org/
[dyssys]: https://dischan.org/store/product.php?productID=8

As can be deduced from books I've read, stories set in the future and stories
where highly advanced technology is common, people create stars purely for
entertainment are my favourite. In short I like Science Fiction a lot.

When I first saw that Dysfunctional Systems' story is based on Science Fiction
I was rather sceptical about the prospects of it. You rarely see a Visual Novel
and SF in a game at the same time, which is also a reason it is hard to imagine
what kind of game could be produced by mixing these two ingredients. I have to
say that people at Dischan squeezed the full potential of this mix and made a
great game which exceeded my expectations by, like, a lot.

The blood of any game, art, is beautiful and polished – I don't have any
objurgations regarding it. As far as character art goes I find Waverly to have
the best (cutest) one – Winter's design simply didn't fit my taste. Bundled
extras are worth a look as well, but while tinkering with the source files
I found an awesome image that people at Dischan apparently [forgot to
include][forgotten_image]. The mistake seems to be fixed in the current build
though.

The [soundtrack][strack] – a pack of awesome music by CombatPlayer worth at
least as much as you pay for whole game is also included into the deal. It's
available in MP3 as well as in FLAC, which I really appreciate.

The short playtime might be the biggest one of the few quirks Dysfunctional
Systems has. We are promised up to 5 episodes though, so both the shortness and
rather abrupt ending can be overlooked. Other than that, this game is worth all
the teas and beers the person, who was kind enough to present me this game,
owed. Thanks!

**The next part** of this article contains spoilers so I split it up into two
distinct articles. If you either already experienced the game or just don't
care, you may [**continue reading**][cont].

[cont]: /entries/h/dysfunctional-systems-2.html
[strack]: https://musicbrainz.org/release/e03cb80f-d4ae-4a1d-8f72-e5715231aafe
[forgotten_image]: https://twitter.com/dischangroup/status/320263379228966912
