---
title: "Midori: Shōjo Tsubaki"
published: 2014-01-02T20:37:00Z
description: A review of a pretty weird anime movie, that appears to be banned in Japan?
---

It’s Japanese. You know those memes of crazy Japanese video game show stunts floating around the
internet? This film has some of *that* spirit in it. It’s different and good.

> do not watch this if you wish to retain your sanity. <br/>
> – trippay

For many it would come across as a classic example of mindfuck style story,
exactly what I was looking for when I acquired a copy of this film. I was led
to believe it is a horror film, a genre I happen to adore. Sadly, that’s not
true – Calling this film a horror is a long stretch, but there’s gore (not
guro[^guro] as many claim) though, so one might not even notice.

[^guro]: Definition of guro tends to vary, but usually it is defined as gore
with elements of pornography.

Characters are the strangest part of the film. What you’ll see here consists
of a careful selection of extreme society outcasts. Designs contribute to
personalities and personalities contribute to their design. The net result is
characters that contribute to the story without giving the viewer a chance to
even think about getting distracted.

A lot of story intricacies are left for free interpretation of entertainee and
not explained in detail. Therefore, I strongly discourage reading any kind of
summaries before watching this film as those might introduce interpretation
bias killing any satisfaction one might get from the film. As for summary… the
life and love story of unlucky girl after she loses her sick mother is
explored. Don’t get misled by simplicity of this one sentence long summary
though.


Animation is not bad. Even good given it was produced by one-man team between
1987 and 1992. Without any help of computers or machines. Of course, it is hard
to ignore how different it is compared to modern anime but I got over it quite
quickly. Colour space chosen by the animator works in favour of enhancing the
atmosphere the story builds too, so you could say it looks fine. Not great, but
fine.

The soundtrack, or rather, the audio itself suffers from encoding artefacts
which were more than common back then and it hurts the film more than it
should. However, even then the soundtrack is mediocre and neither enhances,
nor ruins the experience, story or atmosphere the story creates.

All in all, after a struggle getting through first several minutes of the film
I got drawn into it and enjoyed it throughout.

<!-- Character Score: 7 -->
<!-- Story Score: 8 -->
<!-- Animation Score: 7 -->
<!-- Sound Score: 5 -->
<!-- Enjoyment Score: 9 -->

<!-- Total: 8 -->
