---
title: The renewable energy fallacy
published: 2013-03-09
description: A joke post about the renewable energy label being a hoax on an infinite time scale.
tags: Natural Sciences
copy: CC BY 3.0
---

It is widely accepted to label energy produced from sources such as sunlight,
wind, geothermal heat or even biomass as renewable energy. As soon as one looks
at the bigger picture, it is inevitable for one to start noticing lack of
renewability of all aforementioned sources.

If we define renewable energy as “any naturally occurring, theoretically
inexhaustible source of energy, that is not derived from fossil or nuclear
fuel” we find that neither sun, nor geothermal, biomass or wind energy
satisfy those conditions.

The sun
=======

The Sun, like any other star, “burns” hydrogen into helium emitting huge amounts
of energy in the process. Therefore, the Sun is energy source derived from
nuclear fuel. It is very likely humanity won’t live long enough to observe the
moment the Sun exhausts its last drops of hydrogen, so calling the Sun
inexhaustible might not be that wrong. However ultimately, it is theoretically
proved that the Sun is exhaustible and hence cannot be called renewable.

Geothermal energy
=================

Probably all of us heard how Icelanders exploit geothermal energy and how cheap
their heating systems are in the long run. Contrary to what most people think,
heat in the depths of the Earth does not come from nothingness (nor the
pressure is a cause). The fission of various elements, mostly thorium, heats
the Earth and by extension, the water people pump down there. If people are
smart enough to deem nuclear fuel to be exhaustible, they should find it to be
a case with the geothermal energy too.

Wind
====

> Wind is caused by differences in atmospheric pressure.
> — [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind#Cause)

The atmospheric pressure differences are mostly caused by the Sun. Therefore,
no sun – no wind. It is questionable whether we can call energy source, which
is dependent on existence of another exhaustible (as proved in “The sun”
section) energy source, renewable.

Biomass
=======

Biomass is the worst offender of renewable title. Plants grown for
biomass not only occupy precious farmland and exhaust the soil but depends on
the external (exhaustible) sources of energy such as the sun as well! I would
really like to speak with a person who claims being able to prove biomass
energy is renewable.

The renewable fallacy
=====================

The phrase “renewable energy” is obviously just a marketing trick used by
various interested parties to mislead people into thinking there exists some
kind of energy panacea. Money get wasted, time, which could be better spent, is
wasted too. Politicians vote for terrible decisions and proper long-term energy
strategies are spoiled.
