---
title: You have no right
published: 2013-03-15
tags: Internet
---

As a part of the most recent Google's spring cleaning some services people
rely on are getting closed, most notably – Google Reader. The internet
is busy with voicing their dissatisfaction and swears towards Google, but
I'm yet to see a post which would be a fitting representation of my view of
this situation, hence this post.

First of all, a disclaimer – I have to point out that I've been using Google
Reader for my personal reading needs and its API for [my open-source
project][feeds]. I'd say I have a right to be more angry than most of "just
consumers". My project is loosing its basis after all!

[feeds]: https://github.com/simukis/Feeds

Problem is that no one actually has a right to complain about decisions
Google recently made. When people sign up for Google's services
they are not promised the service will be kept available indefinitely. Sure, it
is not in Google's interest to shut down it's profitable projects, but a
company has the right to decide which ones are profitable enough.

It's not just Google too – any other (free) service might disappear any
time without a notice. Especially if correct words are written in their terms
of service and I can assure you – they are. If you're using a free service
you should be prepared for its disappearance at the time you need the service
the most.

Now as some important facts are reminded we can move to the solutions. In
case one wants more stability, one obviously should pay for the service with
money.
Other way out is to host FOSS by oneself. In addition to some money
it'll require an investment of time too, but then, at last, one is in complete
control of one's data and services.
